=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Usage: ls [OPTION]... [FILE]...
List information about the FILEs (the current directory by default).
Sort entries alphabetically if none of -cftuvSUX nor --sort is specified.

Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options too.
  -a, --all		     do not ignore entries starting with .
  -A, --almost-all	     do not list implied . and ..
      --author		     with -l, print the author of each file
  -b, --escape		     print C-style escapes for nongraphic characters
      --block-size=SIZE      with -l, scale sizes by SIZE when printing them;
			       e.g., '--block-size=M'; see SIZE format below
  -B, --ignore-backups	     do not list implied entries ending with ~
  -c			     with -lt: sort by, and show, ctime (time of last
			       modification of file status information);
			       with -l: show ctime and sort by name;
			       otherwise: sort by ctime, newest first
  -C			     list entries by columns
      --color[=WHEN]	     colorize the output; WHEN can be 'always' (default
			       if omitted), 'auto', or 'never'; more info below
  -d, --directory	     list directories themselves, not their contents
  -D, --dired		     generate output designed for Emacs' dired mode
  -f			     do not sort, enable -aU, disable -ls --color
  -F, --classify	     append indicator (one of */=>@|) to entries
      --file-type	     likewise, except do not append '*'
      --format=WORD	     across -x, commas -m, horizontal -x, long -l,
			       single-column -1, verbose -l, vertical -C
      --full-time	     like -l --time-style=full-iso
  -g			     like -l, but do not list owner
      --group-directories-first
			     group directories before files;
			       can be augmented with a --sort option, but any
			       use of --sort=none (-U) disables grouping
  -G, --no-group	     in a long listing, don't print group names
  -h, --human-readable	     with -l and -s, print sizes like 1K 234M 2G etc.
      --si		     likewise, but use powers of 1000 not 1024
  -H, --dereference-command-line
			     follow symbolic links listed on the command line
      --dereference-command-line-symlink-to-dir
			     follow each command line symbolic link
			       that points to a directory
      --hide=PATTERN	     do not list implied entries matching shell PATTERN
			       (overridden by -a or -A)
      --hyperlink[=WHEN]     hyperlink file names; WHEN can be 'always'
			       (default if omitted), 'auto', or 'never'
      --indicator-style=WORD  append indicator with style WORD to entry names:
			       none (default), slash (-p),
			       file-type (--file-type), classify (-F)
  -i, --inode		     print the index number of each file
  -I, --ignore=PATTERN	     do not list implied entries matching shell PATTERN
  -k, --kibibytes	     default to 1024-byte blocks for disk usage;
			       used only with -s and per directory totals
  -l			     use a long listing format
  -L, --dereference	     when showing file information for a symbolic
			       link, show information for the file the link
			       references rather than for the link itself
  -m			     fill width with a comma separated list of entries
  -n, --numeric-uid-gid      like -l, but list numeric user and group IDs
  -N, --literal 	     print entry names without quoting
  -o			     like -l, but do not list group information
  -p, --indicator-style=slash
			     append / indicator to directories
  -q, --hide-control-chars   print ? instead of nongraphic characters
      --show-control-chars   show nongraphic characters as-is (the default,
			       unless program is 'ls' and output is a terminal)
  -Q, --quote-name	     enclose entry names in double quotes
      --quoting-style=WORD   use quoting style WORD for entry names:
			       literal, locale, shell, shell-always,
			       shell-escape, shell-escape-always, c, escape
			       (overrides QUOTING_STYLE environment variable)
  -r, --reverse 	     reverse order while sorting
  -R, --recursive	     list subdirectories recursively
  -s, --size		     print the allocated size of each file, in blocks
  -S			     sort by file size, largest first
      --sort=WORD	     sort by WORD instead of name: none (-U), size (-S),
			       time (-t), version (-v), extension (-X)
      --time=WORD	     change the default of using modification times;
			       access time (-u): atime, access, use;
			       change time (-c): ctime, status;
			       birth time: birth, creation;
			     with -l, WORD determines which time to show;
			     with --sort=time, sort by WORD (newest first)
      --time-style=TIME_STYLE  time/date format with -l; see TIME_STYLE below
  -t			     sort by time, newest first; see --time
  -T, --tabsize=COLS	     assume tab stops at each COLS instead of 8
  -u			     with -lt: sort by, and show, access time;
			       with -l: show access time and sort by name;
			       otherwise: sort by access time, newest first
  -U			     do not sort; list entries in directory order
  -v			     natural sort of (version) numbers within text
  -w, --width=COLS	     set output width to COLS.	0 means no limit
  -x			     list entries by lines instead of by columns
  -X			     sort alphabetically by entry extension
  -Z, --context 	     print any security context of each file
  -1			     list one file per line.  Avoid '\n' with -q or -b
      --help	 display this help and exit
      --version  output version information and exit

The SIZE argument is an integer and optional unit (example: 10K is 10*1024).
Units are K,M,G,T,P,E,Z,Y (powers of 1024) or KB,MB,... (powers of 1000).
Binary prefixes can be used, too: KiB=K, MiB=M, and so on.

The TIME_STYLE argument can be full-iso, long-iso, iso, locale, or +FORMAT.
FORMAT is interpreted like in date(1).	If FORMAT is FORMAT1<newline>FORMAT2,
then FORMAT1 applies to non-recent files and FORMAT2 to recent files.
TIME_STYLE prefixed with 'posix-' takes effect only outside the POSIX locale.
Also the TIME_STYLE environment variable sets the default style to use.

Using color to distinguish file types is disabled both by default and
with --color=never.  With --color=auto, ls emits color codes only when
standard output is connected to a terminal.  The LS_COLORS environment
variable can change the settings.  Use the dircolors command to set it.

Exit status:
 0  if OK,
 1  if minor problems (e.g., cannot access subdirectory),
 2  if serious trouble (e.g., cannot access command-line argument).

GNU coreutils online help: <https://www.gnu.org/software/coreutils/>
Report any translation bugs to <https://translationproject.org/team/>
Full documentation <https://www.gnu.org/software/coreutils/ls>
or available locally via: info '(coreutils) ls invocation'

=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

LS(1)			    General Commands Manual			 LS(1)

NAME
     ls – list directory contents

SYNOPSIS
     ls [-@ABCFGHILOPRSTUWabcdefghiklmnopqrstuvwxy1%,] [--color=when]
	[-D format] [file ...]

DESCRIPTION
     For each operand that names a file of a type other than directory, ls
     displays its name as well as any requested, associated information.  For
     each operand that names a file of type directory, ls displays the names
     of files contained within that directory, as well as any requested,
     associated information.

     If no operands are given, the contents of the current directory are
     displayed.  If more than one operand is given, non-directory operands are
     displayed first; directory and non-directory operands are sorted
     separately and in lexicographical order.

     The following options are available:

     -@      Display extended attribute keys and sizes in long (-l) output.

     -A      Include directory entries whose names begin with a dot (‘.’)
	     except for . and ...  Automatically set for the super-user unless
	     -I is specified.

     -B      Force printing of non-printable characters (as defined by
	     ctype(3) and current locale settings) in file names as \xxx,
	     where xxx is the numeric value of the character in octal.	This
	     option is not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -C      Force multi-column output; this is the default when output is to
	     a terminal.

     -D format
	     When printing in the long (-l) format, use format to format the
	     date and time output.  The argument format is a string used by
	     strftime(3).  Depending on the choice of format string, this may
	     result in a different number of columns in the output.  This
	     option overrides the -T option.  This option is not defined in
	     IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -F      Display a slash (‘/’) immediately after each pathname that is a
	     directory, an asterisk (‘*’) after each that is executable, an at
	     sign (‘@’) after each symbolic link, an equals sign (‘=’) after
	     each socket, a percent sign (‘%’) after each whiteout, and a
	     vertical bar (‘|’) after each that is a FIFO.

     -G      Enable colorized output.  This option is equivalent to defining
	     CLICOLOR or COLORTERM in the environment and setting
	     --color=auto.  (See below.)  This functionality can be compiled
	     out by removing the definition of COLORLS.  This option is not
	     defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -H      Symbolic links on the command line are followed.  This option is
	     assumed if none of the -F, -d, or -l options are specified.

     -I      Prevent -A from being automatically set for the super-user.  This
	     option is not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -L      Follow all symbolic links to final target and list the file or
	     directory the link references rather than the link itself.  This
	     option cancels the -P option.

     -O      Include the file flags in a long (-l) output.  This option is
	     incompatible with IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).  See
	     chflags(1) for a list of file flags and their meanings.

     -P      If argument is a symbolic link, list the link itself rather than
	     the object the link references.  This option cancels the -H and
	     -L options.

     -R      Recursively list subdirectories encountered.

     -S      Sort by size (largest file first) before sorting the operands in
	     lexicographical order.

     -T      When printing in the long (-l) format, display complete time
	     information for the file, including month, day, hour, minute,
	     second, and year.	The -D option gives even more control over the
	     output format.  This option is not defined in IEEE Std
	     1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -U      Use time when file was created for sorting or printing.  This
	     option is not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -W      Display whiteouts when scanning directories.  This option is not
	     defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -a      Include directory entries whose names begin with a dot (‘.’).

     -b      As -B, but use C escape codes whenever possible.  This option is
	     not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -c      Use time when file status was last changed for sorting or
	     printing.

     --color=when
	     Output colored escape sequences based on when, which may be set
	     to either always, auto, or never.

	     always will make ls always output color.  If TERM is unset or set
	     to an invalid terminal, then ls will fall back to explicit ANSI
	     escape sequences without the help of termcap(5).  always is the
	     default if --color is specified without an argument.

	     auto will make ls output escape sequences based on termcap(5),
	     but only if stdout is a tty and either the -G flag is specified
	     or the COLORTERM environment variable is set and not empty.

	     never will disable color regardless of environment variables.
	     never is the default when neither --color nor -G is specified.

	     For compatibility with GNU coreutils, ls supports yes or force as
	     equivalent to always, no or none as equivalent to never, and tty
	     or if-tty as equivalent to auto.

     -d      Directories are listed as plain files (not searched recursively).

     -e      Print the Access Control List (ACL) associated with the file, if
	     present, in long (-l) output.

     -f      Output is not sorted.  This option turns on -a.  It also negates
	     the effect of the -r, -S and -t options.  As allowed by IEEE Std
	     1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”), this option has no effect on the -d, -l,
	     -R and -s options.

     -g      This option has no effect.  It is only available for
	     compatibility with 4.3BSD, where it was used to display the group
	     name in the long (-l) format output.  This option is incompatible
	     with IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -h      When used with the -l option, use unit suffixes: Byte, Kilobyte,
	     Megabyte, Gigabyte, Terabyte and Petabyte in order to reduce the
	     number of digits to four or fewer using base 2 for sizes.	This
	     option is not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -i      For each file, print the file's file serial number (inode
	     number).

     -k      This has the same effect as setting environment variable
	     BLOCKSIZE to 1024, except that it also nullifies any -h options
	     to its left.

     -l      (The lowercase letter “ell”.) List files in the long format, as
	     described in the The Long Format subsection below.

     -m      Stream output format; list files across the page, separated by
	     commas.

     -n      Display user and group IDs numerically rather than converting to
	     a user or group name in a long (-l) output.  This option turns on
	     the -l option.

     -o      List in long format, but omit the group id.

     -p      Write a slash (‘/’) after each filename if that file is a
	     directory.

     -q      Force printing of non-graphic characters in file names as the
	     character ‘?’; this is the default when output is to a terminal.

     -r      Reverse the order of the sort.

     -s      Display the number of blocks used in the file system by each
	     file.  Block sizes and directory totals are handled as described
	     in The Long Format subsection below, except (if the long format
	     is not also requested) the directory totals are not output when
	     the output is in a single column, even if multi-column output is
	     requested.  (-l) format, display complete time information for
	     the file, including month, day, hour, minute, second, and year.
	     The -D option gives even more control over the output format.
	     This option is not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).

     -t      Sort by descending time modified (most recently modified first).
	     If two files have the same modification timestamp, sort their
	     names in ascending lexicographical order.	The -r option reverses
	     both of these sort orders.

	     Note that these sort orders are contradictory: the time sequence
	     is in descending order, the lexicographical sort is in ascending
	     order.  This behavior is mandated by IEEE Std 1003.2 (“POSIX.2”).
	     This feature can cause problems listing files stored with
	     sequential names on FAT file systems, such as from digital
	     cameras, where it is possible to have more than one image with
	     the same timestamp.  In such a case, the photos cannot be listed
	     in the sequence in which they were taken.	To ensure the same
	     sort order for time and for lexicographical sorting, set the
	     environment variable LS_SAMESORT or use the -y option.  This
	     causes ls to reverse the lexicographical sort order when sorting
	     files with the same modification timestamp.

     -u      Use time of last access, instead of time of last modification of
	     the file for sorting (-t) or long printing (-l).

     -v      Force unedited printing of non-graphic characters; this is the
	     default when output is not to a terminal.

     -w      Force raw printing of non-printable characters.  This is the
	     default when output is not to a terminal.	This option is not
	     defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2001 (“POSIX.1”).

     -x      The same as -C, except that the multi-column output is produced
	     with entries sorted across, rather than down, the columns.

     -y      When the -t option is set, sort the alphabetical output in the
	     same order as the time output.  This has the same effect as
	     setting LS_SAMESORT.  See the description of the -t option for
	     more details.  This option is not defined in IEEE Std 1003.1-2001
	     (“POSIX.1”).

     -%      Distinguish dataless files and directories with a '%' character
	     in long

     -1      (The numeric digit “one”.) Force output to be one entry per line.
	     This is the default when output is not to a terminal.  (-l)
	     output, and don't materialize dataless directories when listing
	     them.

     -,      (Comma) When the -l option is set, print file sizes grouped and
	     separated by thousands using the non-monetary separator returned
	     by localeconv(3), typically a comma or period.  If no locale is
	     set, or the locale does not have a non-monetary separator, this
	     option has no effect.  This option is not defined in IEEE Std
	     1003.1-2001 (“POSIX.1”).

     The -1, -C, -x, and -l options all override each other; the last one
     specified determines the format used.

     The -c, -u, and -U options all override each other; the last one
     specified determines the file time used.

     The -S and -t options override each other; the last one specified
     determines the sort order used.

     The -B, -b, -w, and -q options all override each other; the last one
     specified determines the format used for non-printable characters.

     The -H, -L and -P options all override each other (either partially or
     fully); they are applied in the order specified.

     By default, ls lists one entry per line to standard output; the
     exceptions are to terminals or when the -C or -x options are specified.

     File information is displayed with one or more ⟨blank⟩s separating the
     information associated with the -i, -s, and -l options.

   The Long Format
     If the -l option is given, the following information is displayed for
     each file: file mode, number of links, owner name, group name, number of
     bytes in the file, abbreviated month, day-of-month file was last
     modified, hour file last modified, minute file last modified, and the
     pathname.	If the file or directory has extended attributes, the
     permissions field printed by the -l option is followed by a '@'
     character.  Otherwise, if the file or directory has extended security
     information (such as an access control list), the permissions field
     printed by the -l option is followed by a '+' character.  If the -%
     option is given, a '%' character follows the permissions field for
     dataless files and directories, possibly replacing the '@' or '+'
     character.

     If the modification time of the file is more than 6 months in the past or
     future, and the -D or -T are not specified, then the year of the last
     modification is displayed in place of the hour and minute fields.

     If the owner or group names are not a known user or group name, or the -n
     option is given, the numeric ID's are displayed.

     If the file is a character special or block special file, the device
     number for the file is displayed in the size field.  If the file is a
     symbolic link the pathname of the linked-to file is preceded by “->”.

     The listing of a directory's contents is preceded by a labeled total
     number of blocks used in the file system by the files which are listed as
     the directory's contents (which may or may not include . and .. and other
     files which start with a dot, depending on other options).

     The default block size is 512 bytes.  The block size may be set with
     option -k or environment variable BLOCKSIZE.  Numbers of blocks in the
     output will have been rounded up so the numbers of bytes is at least as
     many as used by the corresponding file system blocks (which might have a
     different size).

     The file mode printed under the -l option consists of the entry type and
     the permissions.  The entry type character describes the type of file, as
     follows:

	   -	 Regular file.
	   b	 Block special file.
	   c	 Character special file.
	   d	 Directory.
	   l	 Symbolic link.
	   p	 FIFO.
	   s	 Socket.
	   w	 Whiteout.

     The next three fields are three characters each: owner permissions, group
     permissions, and other permissions.  Each field has three character
     positions:

	   1.	If r, the file is readable; if -, it is not readable.

	   2.	If w, the file is writable; if -, it is not writable.

	   3.	The first of the following that applies:

		      S     If in the owner permissions, the file is not
			    executable and set-user-ID mode is set.  If in the
			    group permissions, the file is not executable and
			    set-group-ID mode is set.

		      s     If in the owner permissions, the file is
			    executable and set-user-ID mode is set.  If in the
			    group permissions, the file is executable and
			    setgroup-ID mode is set.

		      x     The file is executable or the directory is
			    searchable.

		      -     The file is neither readable, writable,
			    executable, nor set-user-ID nor set-group-ID mode,
			    nor sticky.  (See below.)

		These next two apply only to the third character in the last
		group (other permissions).

		      T     The sticky bit is set (mode 1000), but not execute
			    or search permission.  (See chmod(1) or
			    sticky(7).)

		      t     The sticky bit is set (mode 1000), and is
			    searchable or executable.  (See chmod(1) or
			    sticky(7).)

     The next field contains a plus (‘+’) character if the file has an ACL, or
     a space (‘ ’) if it does not.  The ls utility does not show the actual
     ACL unless the -e option is used in conjunction with the -l option.

ENVIRONMENT
     The following environment variables affect the execution of ls:

     BLOCKSIZE		 If this is set, its value, rounded up to 512 or down
			 to a multiple of 512, will be used as the block size
			 in bytes by the -l and -s options.  See The Long
			 Format subsection for more information.

     CLICOLOR		 Use ANSI color sequences to distinguish file types.
			 See LSCOLORS below.  In addition to the file types
			 mentioned in the -F option some extra attributes
			 (setuid bit set, etc.) are also displayed.  The
			 colorization is dependent on a terminal type with the
			 proper termcap(5) capabilities.  The default “cons25”
			 console has the proper capabilities, but to display
			 the colors in an xterm(1), for example, the TERM
			 variable must be set to “xterm-color”.  Other
			 terminal types may require similar adjustments.
			 Colorization is silently disabled if the output is
			 not directed to a terminal unless the CLICOLOR_FORCE
			 variable is defined or --color is set to “always”.

     CLICOLOR_FORCE	 Color sequences are normally disabled if the output
			 is not directed to a terminal.  This can be
			 overridden by setting this variable.  The TERM
			 variable still needs to reference a color capable
			 terminal however otherwise it is not possible to
			 determine which color sequences to use.

     COLORTERM		 See description for CLICOLOR above.

     COLUMNS		 If this variable contains a string representing a
			 decimal integer, it is used as the column position
			 width for displaying multiple-text-column output.
			 The ls utility calculates how many pathname text
			 columns to display based on the width provided.  (See
			 -C and -x.)

     LANG		 The locale to use when determining the order of day
			 and month in the long -l format output.  See
			 environ(7) for more information.

     LSCOLORS		 The value of this variable describes what color to
			 use for which attribute when colors are enabled with
			 CLICOLOR or COLORTERM.  This string is a
			 concatenation of pairs of the format fb, where f is
			 the foreground color and b is the background color.

			 The color designators are as follows:

			       a     black
			       b     red
			       c     green
			       d     brown
			       e     blue
			       f     magenta
			       g     cyan
			       h     light grey
			       A     bold black, usually shows up as dark grey
			       B     bold red
			       C     bold green
			       D     bold brown, usually shows up as yellow
			       E     bold blue
			       F     bold magenta
			       G     bold cyan
			       H     bold light grey; looks like bright white
			       x     default foreground or background

			 Note that the above are standard ANSI colors.	The
			 actual display may differ depending on the color
			 capabilities of the terminal in use.

			 The order of the attributes are as follows:

			       1.   directory
			       2.   symbolic link
			       3.   socket
			       4.   pipe
			       5.   executable
			       6.   block special
			       7.   character special
			       8.   executable with setuid bit set
			       9.   executable with setgid bit set
			       10.  directory writable to others, with sticky
				    bit
			       11.  directory writable to others, without
				    sticky bit

			 The default is "exfxcxdxbxegedabagacad", i.e., blue
			 foreground and default background for regular
			 directories, black foreground and red background for
			 setuid executables, etc.

     LS_COLWIDTHS	 If this variable is set, it is considered to be a
			 colon-delimited list of minimum column widths.
			 Unreasonable and insufficient widths are ignored
			 (thus zero signifies a dynamically sized column).
			 Not all columns have changeable widths.  The fields
			 are, in order: inode, block count, number of links,
			 user name, group name, flags, file size, file name.

     LS_SAMESORT	 If this variable is set, the -t option sorts the
			 names of files with the same modification timestamp
			 in the same sense as the time sort.  See the
			 description of the -t option for more details.

     TERM		 The CLICOLOR and COLORTERM functionality depends on a
			 terminal type with color capabilities.

     TZ 		 The timezone to use when displaying dates.  See
			 environ(7) for more information.

EXIT STATUS
     The ls utility exits 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurs.

EXAMPLES
     List the contents of the current working directory in long format:

	   $ ls -l

     In addition to listing the contents of the current working directory in
     long format, show inode numbers, file flags (see chflags(1)), and suffix
     each filename with a symbol representing its file type:

	   $ ls -lioF

     List the files in /var/log, sorting the output such that the most
     recently modified entries are printed first:

	   $ ls -lt /var/log

COMPATIBILITY
     The group field is now automatically included in the long listing for
     files in order to be compatible with the IEEE Std 1003.2 (“POSIX.2”)
     specification.

LEGACY DESCRIPTION
     In legacy mode, the -f option does not turn on the -a option and the -g,
     -n, and -o options do not turn on the -l option.

     Also, the -o option causes the file flags to be included in a long (-l)
     output; there is no -O option.

     When -H is specified (and not overridden by -L or -P) and a file argument
     is a symlink that resolves to a non-directory file, the output will
     reflect the nature of the link, rather than that of the file.  In legacy
     operation, the output will describe the file.

     For more information about legacy mode, see compat(5).

SEE ALSO
     chflags(1), chmod(1), sort(1), xterm(1), localeconv(3), strftime(3),
     strmode(3), compat(5), termcap(5), sticky(7), symlink(7)

STANDARDS
     With the exception of options -g, -n and -o, the ls utility conforms to
     IEEE Std 1003.1-2001 (“POSIX.1”) and IEEE Std 1003.1-2008 (“POSIX.1”).
     The options -B, -D, -G, -I, -T, -U, -W, -Z, -b, -h, -w, -y and -, are
     non-standard extensions.

     The ACL support is compatible with IEEE Std 1003.2c (“POSIX.2c”) Draft 17
     (withdrawn).

HISTORY
     An ls command appeared in Version 1 AT&T UNIX.

BUGS
     To maintain backward compatibility, the relationships between the many
     options are quite complex.

     The exception mentioned in the -s option description might be a feature
     that was based on the fact that single-column output usually goes to
     something other than a terminal.  It is debatable whether this is a
     design bug.

     IEEE Std 1003.2 (“POSIX.2”) mandates opposite sort orders for files with
     the same timestamp when sorting with the -t option.

macOS 13.5			August 31, 2020 		    macOS 13.5
